DeCLIP: Decoupled Learning for Open-Vocabulary Dense Perception
Junjie Wang1 Bin Chen2,3,*
Yulin Li1 Bin Kang3 Yichi Chen3 Zhuotao Tian1,*
1School of Computer Science and Technology, HIT, Shenzhen
2International Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence, HIT, Shenzhen
3University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Abstract
Dense visual prediction tasks have been constrained by
their reliance on predefined categories, limiting their applicability in real-world scenarios where visual concepts are
unbounded. While Vision-Language Models (VLMs) like
CLIP have shown promise in open-vocabulary tasks, their
direct application to dense prediction often leads to suboptimal performance due to limitations in local feature representation. In this work, we present our observation that
CLIP’s image tokens struggle to effectively aggregate information from spatially or semantically related regions, resulting in features that lack local discriminability and spatial consistency. To address this issue, we propose DeCLIP ,
a novel framework that enhances CLIP by decoupling the
self-attention module to obtain “content” and “context”
features respectively. The “content” features are aligned
with image crop representations to improve local discriminability, while “context” features learn to retain the spatial
correlations under the guidance of vision foundation models, such as DINO. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
DeCLIP significantly outperforms existing methods across
multiple open-vocabulary dense prediction tasks, including
object detection and semantic segmentation. Code is available at https://github.com/xiaomoguhz/DeCLIP.
1. Introduction
In the era of deep learning, dense prediction tasks like object detection [30, 38] and image segmentation [8, 39] have
rapidly advanced and are widely used. However, traditional
methods [4, 26, 66] recognize only a fixed set of predefined
categories. This restriction hinders the practical application
of these methods in real-world settings, where the range of
visual concepts is virtually boundless. Consequently, increasing attention has been drawn to open-vocabulary methods [10, 47, 50, 61], which aim to detect and segment objects from any category using textual descriptions.
*Corresponding authors
Figure 1. DeCLIP outperforms previous state-of-the-art models on
a broad range of open-vocabulary dense prediction benchmarks.
Building on the success of Vision-Language Models
(VLMs) [9, 27, 36, 43] pre-trained on image-text pairs,
such as CLIP [36], researchers have started leveraging
these models for open-vocabulary dense prediction tasks.
Among these [5, 46–49, 62], transfer-learning approaches
[7, 17, 23, 46, 48, 58] have shown outstanding performance.
These methods utilize the image encoder of VLM as a feature extractor and exclusively train lightweight task-specific
components. Whereas using VLMs as feature extractors
offers significant advantages due to their comprehensive
pre-training, directly applying these image-level models to
dense prediction often leads to domain shift issues [48, 50].
What hinders CLIP in dense perception? To assess
VLM’s constraints in dense perception, we analyze CLIP’s
attention maps across various layers (Figure 3(a)). Our
experiments reveal that CLIP’s [CLS] token may interfere
This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
14824
Ours
Region Classification 
(Top1 mAcc)
39.0
Semantic 
Segmentation (mIoU)
+35.3
+15.6 25.3
9.7
74.3
CLIP
CLIP
DeCLIP
(a) (b)
Image
Figure 2. Quantitative and qualitative comparisons between our method and CLIP. (a)Performance comparisons of open-vocabulary
dense predictions on COCO [29]. (b) Attention map comparisons, with the anchor image token marked in red.
with the correlations among other image tokens, leading to
suboptimal performance in dense prediction tasks.
Specifically, we have observed that in deeper layers (behind the 9th layer), the [CLS] token shifts focus away from
primary objects within the image and attends highly to certain background tokens, as highlighted by the bright spots in
the first row of Figure 3(a). Moreover, image tokens (rows 2
and 3, Figure 3(a)) exhibit similar behavior with the [CLS]
token, showing high attention to certain background tokens
regardless of their positions.
This observation sheds light on why CLIP struggles in
dense prediction tasks: its image tokens fail to aggregate
information from spatially or semantically related regions,
resulting in dense features that lack local discriminability
and spatial consistency. As shown in Figure 2(a), directly
using CLIP features on the COCO dataset yields relatively
inferior performance in open-vocabulary region classification and semantic segmentation. To tackle this, an intuitive
approach is to enhance CLIP’s local representations through
fine-tuning. However, balancing the optimizations of both
local feature spatial correlations and vision-language semantic alignment within a unified architecture becomes a
new challenge. Therefore, is it feasible to disentangle
CLIP’s features and apply separate guiding constraints to
obtain diverse features within a unified architecture?
Our solution. To address these challenges, we propose
DeCLIP, a general unsupervised fine-tuning method aimed
at enhancing both the discriminability and spatial consistency of CLIP’s local features. The core idea is to decouple
the self-attention module of CLIP and learn from different
teacher models separately.
Specifically, DeCLIP decouples the features in the selfattention module into “ content” and “ context” components. The “content” features, responsible for local discriminability, are fine-tuned by aligning pooled region features
with their corresponding image crop [CLS] representations.
Meanwhile, the “context” features, responsible for spatial
consistency, are learned from the feature correlations generated by Vision Foundation Models (VFMs). This decoupled distillation design effectively mitigates optimization
conflicts, improving the generalization ability when applying CLIP to downstream open-vocabulary dense prediction
tasks. As shown in Figure 2, DeCLIP significantly outperforms CLIP in local discriminability and spatial consistency. To summarize, our contributions are as follows:
• We analyze CLIP and find that its limitation in openvocabulary dense prediction arises from image tokens
failing to aggregate information from spatially or semantically related regions.
• To address this issue, we propose DeCLIP, a simple yet
effective unsupervised fine-tuning framework, to enhance
the discriminability and spatial consistency of CLIP’s local features via a decoupled feature enhancement strategy.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate that DeCLIP can be
decently applied to mainstream open-vocabulary dense
prediction tasks, including object detection and semantic
segmentation. As illustrated in Figure 1, DeCLIP outperforms state-of-the-art methods across a broad range of
benchmarks, achieving superior performance metrics in
all evaluated task domains.
2. Background and Motivation
In the following, we provide a concise overview of foundational concepts pertinent to this study in Section 2.1, and
highlight important findings in Section 2.2, which offer
valuable insights for motivating the proposed approach.
2.1. Preliminaries
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training(CLIP) [36] is
built upon two encoders, one for images and one for text.
The visual encoder of CLIP can be a CNN series [15, 31] or
ViT [12], and the text encoder is a Transformer [44]. This
paper focuses on the CLIP model with the ViT architecture,
14825
Layer6 Layer9 Layer12
Layer11
CLIP
CLS
Token
CLIP
Image
Token1
VFM
CLS
Token
VFM
Image
Token1
Layer6 Layer9 Layer12Layer11
CLIP
Image
Token2
VFM
Image
Token2
(a)
 (b)
Figure 3. Visualization of attention maps across different encoding layers of CLIP and VFM. The attention weights are calculated at
a low resolution, then averaged across different heads, and finally upsampled to the original image resolution for visualization. The anchor
image token is marked in red. We observe the occurrence of the “proxy” token phenomenon in CLIP, but not in VFM. Furthermore, when
the position of the anchor image token is shifted, VFM shows a better correlation for image tokens with the same semantics.
(c) Decouple Distillation (Ours)(b) Using Self-Distillation(a) Using Pseudo Regions
CLIP Image
Encoder
Content ContextDecouple
CLIP Image
Encoder
Context DistillationContent Distillation
Vision 
Foundation Model
CLIP Image
Encoder
Align
CLIP Image
Encoder
CLIP Text
Encoder
CLIP Image
Encoder
Align
Bus traveling 
along a country 
road
Horse on a 
summer pasture
Figure 4. Pre-fine-tuning methods for adapting CLIP to dense prediction tasks. Existing work considers establishing region-text
alignment through cost-effective methods via: (a) using images as pseudo regions or (b) using self-distillation on image patches. The
former regards the entire image as a region, which results in a loss of details. The latter uses self-distillation on the image patches thereby
gaining more fine-grained information, but still fails to apply to pixel-level image segmentation.(c) Unlike prior approaches, we use VFM
to guide the spatial consistency of CLIP’s features, and decouple CLIP’s features for distillation separately to avoid optimization conflicts.
which adopts the [CLS] token to represent the overall features of an image. CLIP learns vision-language alignment
by maximizing the cosine similarity between the [CLS] token and text features of matched image-text pairs, and minimizing the similarity for unmatched pairs.
Dense feature extraction with CLIP.ViT-based CLIP consists of a series of stacked attention blocks. For example,
the ViT-B version of CLIP includes 12 attention block layers. Let X = {x0, x1, · · · , xh×w} denotes the input to the
last attention block, where xi ∈ R1×D. The computation
within this attention block can be expressed as:
Q = Projq(X), K = Projk(X), V = Projv(X), (1)
Y = X + Proj (Attnqk · V) , (2)
Z = Y + FFN(Y), (3)
where Q, K, and V represent the query, key, and value
embeddings, respectively; Proj denotes projection layers; Attn qk = SoftMax

QK⊤/
√
d

represents the selfattention process, with d denoting the dimension of each
attention head. FFN denotes a feed-forward network. For
simplicity, normalization operations are omitted.
After passing through the final attention block, Z[0] represents the global [CLS] token. The remaining image patch
embeddings Z[1 : h × w] can be reshaped to obtain dense
feature representations Xdense ∈ RC×H×W 1.
Adapting CLIP to dense prediction tasks.Several studies
have attempted to alleviate the domain shift issue in applying CLIP to dense prediction tasks via fine-tuning strategies.
These approaches fall into two main categories:
• Joint fine-tuning. These methods fine-tune CLIP while
training task-specific components [10, 17, 18, 25, 28, 52,
57]. For instance, CAT-Seg [10] proposes an attention
fine-tuning strategy based on ViT CLIP, which general1The final V-L projection layer is omitted here for brevity.
14826
izes well to unseen categories. MAFT [17] leverages attention bias to fine-tune CLIP for mask classification.
• Pre-fine-tuning. These methods directly fine-tune CLIP
using cost-efficient techniques [33, 48–50, 63], which are
more closely aligned with the approach proposed in this
paper. As illustrated in Figure 4(a), CLIM [49] employs a
mosaic augmentation technique to stitch multiple images
into a single image, enabling each sub-image to serve as a
pseudo-region for region-text contrastive learning. CLIPSelf [48] enhances CLIP’s region classification accuracy
by maximizing cosine similarity between its region representations and the corresponding image crop representations, as illustrated in Figure 4(b).
2.2. Key Observations
Despite the promising results of the two categories of finetuned methods in Section 2.1, they continue to exhibit certain limitations. Joint fine-tuning methods are typically specific to tasks or models and heavily rely on labor-intensive
annotations of dense prediction tasks. On the other hand,
pre-fine-tuning methods demonstrate broader applicability.
However, their region-level fine-tuning technique remains
limited in image segmentation tasks that require pixel-level
details. To tackle this issue, we investigate the feasibility of incorporating pixel-level details into CLIP’s pre-finetuning, enabling it to better align with open-vocabulary
dense prediction tasks. In the following, we start by analyzing CLIP’s attention maps across various layers.
The “proxy” token phenomenon. As shown in Figure
3(a), we found that in CLIP’s shallow layer, the attention
weights of CLIP’s [CLS] token are widely distributed across
the image (i.e., layer 6). However, in the deeper layers, the
[CLS] token shifts its focus away from primary objects in
the image and attends to specific tokens, as highlighted by
the bright spots within the image background. Additionally,
we found that image tokens (rows 2 and 3) exhibit similar
behavior to the [CLS] token, showing high attention to certain tokens in the background, regardless of their position.
These background tokens may serve as “proxies” for the
[CLS] token. This suggests that these tokens aggregate essential information from other image tokens, enabling the
[CLS] token to form an approximate “global view” by summarizing content from them, thereby facilitating image classification. However, these “proxy” tokens negatively affect the feature correlations between image tokens. As illustrated in Figure 3(a), when we shift the position of the
anchor image token (from the bird to the branch), we observe that the new image token still pays high attention to
the “proxy” tokens. This results in a lack of correlation