GeoDepth: From Point-to-Depth to Plane-to-Depth Modeling for
Self-Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation
Haifeng Wu, Shuhang Gu, Lixin Duan, Wen Li *
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{haifengwu205, shuhanggu, lxduan, liwenbnu }@gmail.com
Abstract
Self-supervised monocular depth estimation has long been
treated as a point-wise prediction problem, where the depth
of each pixel is usually estimated independently. However ,
artifacts are often observed in the estimated depth map, e.g.,
depth values for points located in the same region may jump
dramatically. To address this issue, we propose a novel selfsupervised monocular depth estimation framework called
GeoDepth, where we explore the intrinsic geometric representation in 3D scenes for producing accurate and continuous depth maps. In particular , we model the complex 3D
scene as a collection of planes with varying sizes, where
each plane is characterized by a unique set of parameters,
namely planar normal (indicating plane orientation) and
planar offset (deﬁning the perpendicular distance from the
camera center to the plane). Under this modeling, points
in the same plane are enforced to share a unique representation and their depth variations related only to pixel coordinates, thus this geometric relationship can be exploited
to regularize the depth variations of these points. To this
end, we design a structured plane generation module that
introduces spatio-temporal geometric cues and the plane
uniqueness principle to recover the correct scene plane representation. In addition, we develop a depth discontinuity
module to identify depth discontinuity regions and subsequently optimize them. Our experiments on the KITTI and
NYUv2 datasets demonstrate that GeoDepth achieves stateof-the-art performance, with additional tests on Make3D
and ScanNet validating its generalization capabilities.
1. Introduction
Monocular depth estimation is a pivotal task in computer
vision, which aims to predict a pixel-wise depth map for
a given image. Each value in the depth map measures the
distance from the corresponding point in the 3D scene to
the camera plane [
44]. Given its ability to provide 3D
*Corresponding author
scene structure information, monocular depth estimation
is broadly applicable in ﬁelds such as autonomous driving
[
11, 33], robotics [7], and augmented reality [31]. While supervised learning can deliver high-performance depth predictions, acquiring dense depth labels is often costly. As
a result, self-supervised monocular depth estimation methods, which leverage only video or stereo images for training
[
9, 13, 46, 60], have emerged as a practical alternative.
Despite its advantages, self-supervised monocular depth
estimation frequently encounters difﬁculties in achieving
accurate and smooth depth estimation, particularly in regions lacking texture [
27, 55, 57]. This mainly because
the mainstream approaches usually adopts a point-to-depth
modeling strategy (refer to Fig. 1(a)), where image pixels
are treated as independent points, and the depth values are
estimated from their discrete representations[
28]. As a result, artifacts are often observed in the estimated depth map,
e.g., depth values for points located in the same region may
jump dramatically. We refer to this phenomenon as depth
discontinuity. Some works [
27, 36, 54, 55, 57, 59] attempt
to leverage only plane cues from surface normals to facilitate smoother depth estimation by assuming neighboring
pixels form a local plane. Nevertheless, relying solely on
surface normals as plane indicators might be unreliable, as
it contradicts the principle of plane uniqueness in Geometric Algebra [
20], which necessitates both a normal vector
and an offset for a deﬁnitive plane representation in 3D
space. Therefore, it is appealing to develop a robust modeling strategy to capture the intrinsic geometric representation
for achieving accurate and continuous depth estimation.
In this paper, we propose a new self-supervised monocular depth estimation framework called GeoDepth, where
a novel plane-to-depth modeling strategy is developed to
address the depth discontinuity issues inherent in point-todepth methods. The motivation of GeoDepth is that a 3D
scene can essentially be modeled as a collection of planes
of varying sizes, where all points within the same plane can
be described by a unique set of parameters, namely the planar normal and planar offset [
20]. As depicted in Fig. 1(b),
our methodology models coplanar points as a uniform plaThis CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
11525
𝑃ଵ(𝐷ଵ, 𝑁ଵ, 𝑂ଵ)Scene depth(𝐷ଵ)
𝑃ଶ(𝐷ଶ, 𝑁ଵ, 𝑂ଵ)
𝑃ଷ(𝐷ଷ, 𝑁ଶ, 𝑂ଶ)
𝑃ଵ
𝑃ଶ
𝑃ଷ
Planar normal Image Planar offset Scene depth
Share the same plane
(a) Point-to-depth modeling (b) Plane-to-depth modeling (Ours)
Planar normal
Planar offset
Scene depth
Captured image
Scene depth
Feature map
Share the same plane
Treated as independent 
points
Depth often varies abruptly
3m
0.5m×
Discrete representation
1.5m
Depth accurate and smooth
1.7m
√
Same
Different
𝑃ଵ
𝑃ଶ
𝑃ଷ
𝑃ଵ
𝑃ଶ
𝑃ଷ
Geometric mapping
𝑃ଵ(𝐷ଵ, 𝑁ଵ, 𝑂ଵ)Scene depth(𝐷ଵ)
𝑃ଶ(𝐷ଶ, 𝑁ଵ, 𝑂ଵ)
𝑃ଷ(𝐷ଷ, 𝑁ଶ, 𝑂ଶ)
𝑃ଵ
𝑃ଶ
𝑃ଷ
Planar normal Image Planar offset Scene depth
Planar representation
(a) Point-to-depth modeling (b) Plane-to-depth modeling (Ours)
Planar normal
Planar offset
Scene depth
Captured image
Scene depth
Feature map
Planar representation
Treated as independent 
points
Depth often varies abruptly
3m
0.5m×
Discrete representation
1.5m
1.7m
√
Same
Different
𝑃ଵ
𝑃ଶ
𝑃ଷ
𝑃ଵ
𝑃ଶ
𝑃ଷ
Geometric mapping
Depth accurate and smooth
Figure 1. An illustration of our motivation . (a) Self-supervised monocular depth estimation has long been treated as a point-wise
prediction problem, where the depth of each pixel is usually estimated independently. Consequently, artifacts are often observed in the
estimated depth map, e.g., depth values for points located in the same region may jump dramatically. (b) Instead, our GeoDepth models
the complex 3D scene as planes of varying size, parameterized by planar normals and planar offsets, and infers the geometric correlation
from them to depth. In GeoDepth, coplanar points are modeled as a uniﬁed representation instead of discrete representation and their
depth variations are solely related to continuous image coordinates (see Eq. (
1)). Therefore, by recovering structured representation among
pixels, we are able to obtain more continuous depth map.
nar representation, rather than discrete points. This insight
naturally leads us to estimate these two planar properties
from the input image as a structured plane representation
and derive the geometric correlation to depth from them. In
our modeling framework, the depth variations of coplanar
points are exclusively linked to pixel coordinates (see Eq.
(
1)), thereby eliminating depth discontinuities by restoring
the structured representation among pixels.
To accurately recover the plane representation, we propose a structured plane generation module. This module
initially utilizes spatio-temporal geometric cues to guide
the two planar properties to recover the approximate scene
structure, and then jointly optimizes them based on the
plane uniqueness principle [
20] to ensure that coplanar
points converge to a uniﬁed representation. Additionally,
recognizing that depth discontinuities often occur in lowtexture regions, we introduce a depth discontinuity awareness module that dynamically identiﬁes pixels with lower
photometric errors as potential depth discontinuity regions
and subsequently optimizes them.
We conduct extensive experiments on two outdoor
datasets: KITTI [
11] and Make3D [ 37], and two indoor
datasets: NYUv2 [ 42] and ScanNet [ 6]. Results on KITTI
and NYUv2 show that our method achieves state-of-theart performance and that our design choices are effective.
Results on Make3D and ScanNet verify the generalization
ability of our method to unseen outdoor and indoor scenes.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows:
• We introduce GeoDepth, a novel self-supervised monocular depth estimation framework, which develops a planeto-depth modeling strategy to address the depth discontinuity issues inherent in point-to-depth methods.
• We propose a structured plane generation module and
a depth discontinuity awareness module to learn correct
plane representations ( i.e., normal and offset) in a selfsupervised paradigm.
• Extensive experiments on widely-used outdoor datasets
(KITTI and Make3D) and indoor datasets (NYUv2 and
ScanNet) show the robustness and generalization ability.
2. Related Work
2.1. Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation
As a pioneering work on supervised learning, Eigen et al.
[
8] ﬁrst predicted a depth from a single image by stacking
coarse-scale and ﬁne-scale networks. Since then, many su11526
pervised works have been proposed by modifying the model
architecture [
38, 50, 56], training on large datasets [ 5, 51],
designing robust loss functions [ 26, 61], and transforming
this task into an ordinal regression issue [2, 3, 21, 39]. However, we can only capture sparse depth data from the physical world, and collecting large-scale training data is timeconsuming and expensive. Thus, high data requirements
and collection costs limit the application of these methods.
2.2. Self­supervised Monocular Depth Estimation
Considering that large-scale annotated datasets are not always available, self-supervised depth estimation methods
have attracted some attention. Garg et al. [
10] ﬁrst introduced an alternative to learn depth from stereo pairs in
a self-supervised manner. To release the requirement of
stereo images, Zhou et al. [
66] estimated depth map and
camera pose simultaneously and only used video data in the
training phase. Following this, a series of works were proposed by designing robust losses [
16, 41, 58], using auxiliary information during training [25, 48], dealing with moving objects [13, 24], and adding extra geometric constraints
[27, 55]. However, these methods adopt point-to-depth
modeling, that is, independently modeling the depth of each
pixel [
28], leading to depth discontinuities. In contrast, we
revisit this task and propose a novel self-supervised framework, which utilizes plane-to-depth modeling to tackle the
depth discontinuities.
2.3. Plane Cues for Depth Estimation
The purpose of depth estimation is to obtain depth maps
with continuous structure. To this end, one type of monocular depth estimation work attempts to introduce multi-plane
representations. GonzalezBello et al. [
14, 15] predeﬁned
multiple depth planes and then used a deep neural network to learn the predeﬁned plane to which each pixel belongs. However, as real 3D scenes are complex and contain
slanted planes, such representation is sensitive to discretization [
47]. Another type of work focuses on incorporating
local plane prior. Y anget al. [55] introduced an edge-aware
depth-normal consistency constraint inside the network to
regularize the depth map by using the surface normal extracted from the depth map. Subsequently, some works
[
36, 54, 59] jointly predicted the depth map and the surface normal, and regularized the depth with a depth-normal
consistency loss. In addition, StructDepth [
27] adopted
a Manhattan-world assumption in indoor settings, forcing
major surfaces (ﬂoor, ceiling, and walls) to align with dominant directions. However, these methods adopted solely
surface normals as plane guides, which is unreliable since
it cannot represent the scene plane deterministically. Moreover, as non-planar region violates the local plane assumption, planar guidance in these methods is performed on all
pixels, leading to incorrect depth training.
3. Plane-to-Depth Modeling
In monocular depth estimation, the objective is to produce
a depth map where each value corresponds to the distance
between the camera plane and its corresponding point in
the 3D scene. Consequently, once the 3D scene has been
reconstructed, the depth map can be readily derived using
the principles of perspective geometry.
Typically, a real-world 3D scene can be seen as an assembly of planes of varying dimensions, ranging from the
entire scene down to a single pixel. According to the plane
uniqueness representation principle, a plane in 3D space can
be represented by a normal vector n and an offset vector o.
Thus, a complete 3D scene can be mathematically denoted
as: π = {nk, ok}M
k=1, where M is the number of planes
in the 3D scene. According to the point-normal form, a
3D point P on a plane πi = {ni, oi} satisﬁes: nT
i P = oi,
In addition, the 3D point P located in the plane πi can be
projected to a 2D point p = [ u, v]T in the image space:
˜p = P/(dK− 1), where ˜p denotes the homogeneous coordinate of p, d is the depth at P, and K is intrinsic to the camera.
Thus, for an individual plane, the geometric correlation between the depth and planar normal as well as planar offset
is deﬁned as:
d = oi
nT
i K− 1˜p . (1)
It can be observed that the depth variations of coplanar
points are exclusively linked to pixel coordinates p, since
their planar normal and planar offset are equal. This insight
naturally leads us to estimate these two planar properties
from the input image as a structured plane representation
and derive the geometric correlation to depth from them. To
this end, we extend Eq. (
1) to formulate the plane-to-depth
modeling for self-supervised monocular depth estimation:
D(p) = O(p)
NT (p)K− 1˜p , (2)
where N ∈ R3× H× W , O ∈ R3× H× W and D ∈ R3× H× W
are the planar normal, planar offset, and depth map of an
image, respectively. Note that H × W represent the spatial
resolution of the input image.
Compared with the direct prediction of pixel-wise depth
in existing self-supervised monocular depth estimation
framework, our approach focuses on mining structured explici