Audio-Visual Instance Segmentation
Ruohao Guo1, Xianghua Ying1*, Yaru Chen2, Dantong Niu3, Guangyao Li4, Liao Qu5, Yanyu Qi6,
Jinxing Zhou7 Bowei Xing1, Wenzhen Yue1, Ji Shi1, Qixun Wang1, Peiliang Zhang8, Buwen Liang6
1State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science and
Technology, Peking University,2University of Surrey, 3UC Berkeley, 4Tsinghua University,
5CMU, 6China Agricultural University, 7MBZUAI, 8Wuhan University of Technology
Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new multi-modal task, termed
audio-visual instance segmentation (AVIS), which aims
to simultaneously identify, segment and track individual
sounding object instances in audible videos. To facilitate this research, we introduce a high-quality benchmark
named AVISeg, containing over 90K instance masks from
26 semantic categories in 926 long videos. Additionally, we
propose a strong baseline model for this task. Our model
first localizes sound source within each frame, and condenses object-specific contexts into concise tokens. Then it
builds long-range audio-visual dependencies between these
tokens using window-based attention, and tracks sounding objects among the entire video sequences. Extensive experiments reveal that our method performs best
on AVISeg, surpassing the existing methods from related
tasks. We further conduct the evaluation on several multimodal large models. Unfortunately, they exhibits subpar
performance on instance-level sound source localization
and temporal perception. We expect that AVIS will inspire the community towards a more comprehensive multimodal understanding. Dataset and code is available at
https://github.com/ruohaoguo/avis.
1. Introduction
Vision and hearing are our primary channels of communication and sensation [9, 23, 63, 64, 66–68]. Audio-visual
collaboration is beneficial for humans to better perceive and
interpret the world. Humans have the ability to associate
mixed sounds with object instances in complicated realistic
scenarios. Imagine a cocktail-party scenario: when a group
of people is speaking, we can not only locate the sound
sources but also determine how many people are talking.
Inspired by this human perception, we explore instancelevel sound source localization in long videos and pro*Corresponding Author
pose a new task, namely audio-visual instance segmentation
(A VIS). As can be seen in Figure 1 (c), it requests a model
to simultaneously classify, segment and track sounding object instances—identify which object categories are making
sounds, infer where the sounding objects are , and monitor
when they are making sounds . This new task facilitates a
wide range of practical applications, including embodied
robotics, video surveillance, video editing, etc. Moreover,
it can serve as a fundamental task for evaluating the comprehension capabilities of multi-modal large models.
Audio-visual instance segmentation is related to several
existing tasks. For example, audio-visual object segmentation (A VOS) [65] is to separate sounding objects from the
background region of a given audible video, as shown in
Figure 1 (a). Unlike A VOS being tasked with binary foreground segmentation, audio-visual semantic segmentation
(A VSS) [69] aims at predicting semantic maps that assign
each pixel with a specific category, as shown in Figure 1 (b).
To accomplish the above tasks, many works [17, 22, 35, 56]
extend the image segmentation frameworks [5, 12] to the
video domain, and design various audio-visual fusion modules for sound source localization. Despite promising performance in the A VSBench dataset [69], current methods
still suffer from two limitations in real-world scenarios.
First, these methods fail to differentiate two sounding objects with the same category, such as the woman, man,
left ukulele and right ukulele depicted in Figure 1. Second, these methods focus on 5- or 10-second trimmed short
videos and ignore long-range modeling abilities, which may
lead to weak performance in real world.
One potential reason that the A VIS task is rarely studied
is the absence of a high-quality dataset. Despite the existence of audio-visual segmentation datasets [65, 69], none
are directly applicable to our proposed task, due to lacking
instance-level annotations and long-form videos. Therefore, in this work, we built the first audio-visual instance
segmentation dataset, namely A VISeg. The new dataset
consists of 926 videos with an average duration of 61.4 seconds and 94,074 high-quality masks, covering 26 common
This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
13550
Figure 1. Comparison of different audio-visual segmentation tasks. (a) Audio-Visual Object Segmentation (A VOS) only requires binary
segmentation. (b) Audio-Visual Semantic Segmentation (A VSS) associates one category with every pixel. (c) Audio-Visual Instance
Segmentation (A VIS) treats each sounding object of the same class as an individual instance.
categories from 4 real-world scenarios (Music, Speaking,
Machine and Animal). Our dataset can also be served as
a benchmark for A VOS and A VSS tasks. Additionally, we
present a novel evaluation metric, termed frame-level sound
localization accuracy (FSLA), which measures the proportion of frames that are correctly predicted by the model out
of the total number of frames.
In order to deal with the above A VIS task, we follow the
query-based segmentation paradigm [12, 26] and propose
a baseline model called A VISM. To be specific, a framelevel sound source localizer segments sounding objects
within each frame independently and summarizes per-frame
scenes into a small amount of object tokens. Then, a videolevel sounding object tracker is designed to build frame-toframe communications and track sounding objects throughout the entire video. To lessen computational overheads in
processing long and high-resolution videos, the tracker uses
the concise object tokens as a mean of conveying information rather than dense image features, and adopts windowbased self-attention mechanisms to efficiently capture longrange dependencies in consecutive frames. Experimental
results demonstrate the superiority of our baseline. Additionally, we make a thorough evaluation of several prominent multi-modal large models on our A VISeg dataset. Surprisingly, these self-proclaimed large models are far from
satisfactory in instance-aware sound source localization and
temporal perception. Our dataset emphasizes the necessity
for further improvements in handling audio-visual data and
long videos, providing insights for future development of
multi-modal large models. Our contributions are as follows:
(1) To our best knowledge, this is the first work exploring
audio-visual instance segmentation, which aims to classify,
segment and track sounding objects in given audible videos.
(2) We create a high-quality video dataset to support the
above task, containing 926 videos with an average length of
61.4s. Besides, we propose a novel frame-level metric for
evaluating audio-visual instance segmentation.
(3) A strong baseline model is developed to localize
sound source in each frame and track sounding objects in
the entire video. To handle long videos, it distils image features into a small number of tokens and uses window-based
attention to convey audio-visual temporal information.
(4) Extensive experiments indicate that our framework
achieves state-of-the-art results under all evaluation metrics.
Moreover, our dataset can also serve as a potential benchmark for evaluating various multi-modal large models.
2. Related Work
2.1. Video Instance Segmentation
Video instance segmentation (VIS) aims at simultaneous
segmentation and tracking of all object instances in videos.
Early methods [2, 4, 39, 55, 57] often extend CNN-based
image segmentation methods [20, 25] to establish temporal consistency. For example, MaskTrack R-CNN [55] introduces an additional tracking head to Mask R-CNN [25]
for object matching and association between frames. SGNet [39] follows the anchor-free FCOS detector [49] and
directly leverages the object centerness from detection to
delineate the temporal coherence in video sequences. The
above approaches require extra post-processing steps, such
as non-maximal suppression (NMS), leading to higher computational costs and potential misdetections. Recent methods [11, 26, 28, 31, 51, 52, 58, 60] adapt Transformer-based
image segmentation methods [5, 12] to the VIS task. For
example, VisTR [51] builds on the query-based DETR [5]
13551
and naturally outputs the sequence of masks for each instance without heuristic matching or hand-designed postprocessing. Follow-up works, such as Mask2Former-VIS
[11] and SeqFormer [52], design more querying strategies
to improve the performance of segmentation and tracking.
To avoid heavy computation and memory usage, IFC [28]
and VITA [26] first distill dense spatio-temporal features
into a small amount of tokens, and then perform inter-frame
communication between tokens. This information-passing
paradigm allows models for efficiently handling long and
high-resolution videos with a common GPU.
2.2. Audio-Visual Segmentation
Audio-visual segmentation (A VS) focuses on localizing
and segmenting sounding objects within each video frame.
Zhou et al. [65, 69] introduce the first A VS dataset, namely
A VSBench, which serves two different sub-tasks including
audio-visual object segmentation (A VOS) and audio-visual
semantic segmentation (A VSS). The former [65] requires
producing binary masks of sounding objects, while the latter [69] further needs to generate semantic maps representing the object category. To address these problems, they employ a standard encoder-decoder architecture with a modified non-local block to encode space-time relation and segment sounding objects. CA VP [10] builds an A VS dataset
by randomly matching the images from COCO [38] and audio files from VGGSound [6] based on the semantic classes
of the objects. Inspired by DETR [5] and Mask2Former
[12], recent works [17, 21, 22, 35, 56] adopt the query-based
architecture decode masks for sounding objects. For example, A VSegFormer [17] trivially incorporates audio features and learnable queries, enabling the decoder to capture
relevant visual semantics and predict the audio-constrained
masks. COMBO [56] explores multi-order bilateral relations in modality, temporal and pixel levels for the A VSS
task. Notably, a bilateral-fusion module is designed to align
audio and visual modalities bi-directionally and assist the
model in segmenting the sounding objects.
3. New Task
3.1. Problem Definition
Audio-visual instance segmentation (A VIS) is a challenging multi-modal task that involves localizing and segmenting sounding objects in a video, while assigning each a
unique identity label to ensure consistent tracking throughout the video. In this task, we predefine a category label set
as C = {1, ..., K}, where K is the number of categories.
Given a video sequence with T frames and its corresponding audio, suppose there are N sounding objects belonging
to the category label set C in the video. For each sounding
object oi, let ci ∈ C denote its category label, and letmi
t denote its binary segmentation mask intth frame where t ∈ T ′
and T ′ denotes the sounding time set, i.e., T ′ ⊆ T . We assume that an A VIS model outputs H instance hypotheses.
For each hypothesis oj, it needs to contain a predicted category label ˜cj ∈ C , a confidence score ˜sj ∈ [0, 1], and a
sequence of predicted binary masks ˜mj
˜t. The goal of A VIS
task is to minimize the difference between the ground truth
and the hypotheses. This requires the A VIS model to correctly determine which instances are making sounds, accurately identify and segment these sounding instances, and
reliably track them in the entire video.
3.2. Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate how well an A VIS model performs, we need
to choose appropriate metrics to compare its outputs with
the ground truth. In our task, we adopt two evaluation protocols including the mean Average Precision (mAP) [55] and
the Higher Order Tracking Accuracy (HOTA) [43]. mAP
follows the computation of the average precision-recall metric over trajectories, which is commonly used in video instance segmentation. However, mAP is not perfectly suited
to our task, because it can be increased by producing many
different predictions with low confidence scores and does
not decrease even if non-sounding objects are predicted.
HOTA performs a bijective matching at the detection level
while scoring association over trajectories, which is designed for multi-object tracking task. This makes HOTA
a balanced metric for measuring both detection and association. When applied to the A VIS task, it can penalize those
models that predict non-sounding objects.
Besides considering the above object-based metrics, we
propose a novel measure, namely frame-level sound localization accuracy (FSLA), tailored to measure the proportion
of frames that are correctly predicted by the model out of the
total number of frames. Specifically, we first use the Hungarian algorithm [32] to determine a one-to-one matching
between ground-truth and predicted detections. For each
frame, it can be treated as correct frame if it satisfies the
following conditions: 1) The number of sounding objects is
correct; 2) The category of the sounding objects is correct;
3) The IoU (Intersection over Union) between the ground
truth and the predicted sounding objects is greater than
threshold α. The final score is computed by averaging over
all classes before averaging different α thresholds (0.05 to
0.95 in 0.05 intervals). The pseudo code of the FSLA metric is in the Supp. Materials . Compared to other metrics,
our FSLA allows for easier localization of incorrect frames
and offers a more 