Fractal Calibration for long-tailed object detection
Konstantinos Panagiotis Alexandridis1,∗, Ismail Elezi1, Jiankang Deng2, Anh Nguyen3 and Shan Luo4
1Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab;2Imperial College London; 3University of Liverpool; 4King’s College London
∗konstantinos.alexandridis@huawei.com
Abstract
Real-world datasets follow an imbalanced distribution,
which poses significant challenges in rare-category object
detection. Recent studies tackle this problem by developing
re-weighting and re-sampling methods, that utilise the class
frequencies of the dataset. However, these techniques focus
solely on the frequency statistics and ignore the distribution
of the classes in image space, missing important information. In contrast to them, we propose FRActal CALibration
(FRACAL): a novel post-calibration method for long-tailed
object detection. FRACAL devises a logit adjustment
method that utilises the fractal dimension to estimate how
uniformly classes are distributed in image space. During
inference, it uses the fractal dimension to inversely downweight the probabilities of uniformly spaced class predictions achieving balance in two axes: between frequent and
rare categories, and between uniformly spaced and sparsely
spaced classes. FRACAL is a post-processing method and it
does not require any training, also it can be combined with
many off-the-shelf models such as one-stage sigmoid detectors and two-stage instance segmentation models. FRACAL
boosts the rare class performance by up to 8.6% and surpasses all previous methods on LVIS dataset, while showing good generalisation to other datasets such as COCO,
V3Det and OpenImages. We provide the code at https:
//github.com/kostas1515/FRACAL.
1. Introduction
In recent years, there have been astonishing developments
in the field of object detection [8, 10, 57]. Most of these
works utilise vast, balanced, curated datasets such as ImageNet1k [15], or MS-COCO [48] to learn efficient image
representations. However, in the real world, data are rarely
balanced, in fact, they follow a long-tailed distribution [55].
When models are trained with long-tailed data, they perform well for the frequent classes of the distribution but
they perform inadequately for the rare classes [46, 68, 78].
This problem poses significant challenges to the safe deployment of detection and instance segmentation models
Figure 1. Previous works used class information ps(y) to align
the learned source distribution ps(y, u|x) with the balanced target
distribution pt(y, u|x), without considering the space u and class
y relationship i.e. ps(y, u). FRACAL captures ps(y, u), using
the fractal dimension, and embeds fractal margins during inference, aligning the learned distribution ps(y, u|x) with the target
pt(y, u|x) better than previous works.
in real-world safe-critical applications such as autonomous
vehicles, medical applications, and industrial applications,
scenarios where rare class detection is paramount.
Many approaches address the long-tailed detection problem by employing adaptive re-weighting or data resampling
techniques to handle imbalanced distributions [76, 79, 90].
However all these methods require training. In contrast,
in long-tailed image classification, alternative methods focus on mitigating class imbalance during inference through
a post-calibrated softmax adjustment (PCSA) [3, 26, 68].
PCSA boasts strong performance, good compatibility with
many methods like data augmentation, masked image modeling, contrastive learning, and does not necessitate specialized loss function optimization, making it more user
friendly [11, 86, 102].
However, current PCSA methods utilise solely the train
set’s class frequencyps(y) as shown in Fig.1-top, overlooking the significance of the classes’ dependence on the location distribution ps(y, u). This is a significant limitation of
previous PCSA methods because the location information
This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
15139
is a critical indicator considering the correlation between
classes y and their respective locations u.
Motivated by the class-location dependence [34], in this
work, we investigate a novel way to incorporate location
information into post-calibration for imbalanced object detection to boost the performance of rare classes by fully exploiting dataset statistics. We empirically show that naively
injecting location statistics results in inferior performance
because the location information is sparse for the rare
classes. To overcome this, we propose FRACAL (FRActal CALibration), a novel post-calibration method based
on the fractal dimension, as shown in Fig.1-bottom. Our
method aggregates the location distribution of all objects in
the training set, using the box-counting method [70]. This
resolves the sparsity problem and significantly enhances the
performance of both frequent and rare classes as shown in
our experiments.
Our method comes with several advantages. First, it
performs an effective class calibration, suitable for the object detection task, using the dataset’s class frequencies.
Secondly, it captures the class-location dependency [34],
using the fractal dimension, and it fuses this information into class calibration. This results in a better and
unique space-aware logit-adjustment technique that complements the frequency-dependent class calibration method
and achieves higher overall performance compared to previous PCSA techniques.
FRACAL can be easily combined with both one-stage
and two stage detectors, Softmax and Sigmoid-based models, various instance segmentation architectures, various
backbones, sampling strategies, and largely increase the
performance during the inference step. FRACAL significantly advances the performance on the challenging LVISv1
benchmark [20] with no training, or additional inference
cost by 8.6% rare mask average precision (AP m
r ).
Our contributions are as follows:
• For the first time, we show the importance of the classlocation dependence in post-calibration for long-tailed
object detection.
• We capture the location-class dependence via a spaceaware long-tailed object detection calibration method
based on the fractal dimension.
• Our method performs remarkably on various detectors
and backbones, on both heavily imbalanced datasets such
as LVIS and less imbalanced datasets such as COCO,
V3DET and OpenImages, outperforming the state-of-theart by up to 8.6%.
2. Related Work
General Object Detection. General object detection [8,
10, 47, 50, 52, 67, 69, 71, 104] and instance segmentation [5, 6, 9, 22, 31, 47, 75] have witnessed tremendous
advancements. Recently, transformer-based detectors were
Table 1. Post-calibration techniques in long-tailed tasks. τ and γ
are hyper-parameters, bg is the background class, µy and ςy are
estimated class mean and standard deviation respectively. Compared to past works, FRACAL uses both frequency (F) and space
(S) information, as shown in Section 3.
Method Use Adjustment
LA. [60] F z′
y = zy − τ log(ps(y))
IIF [3] F z′
y = −zy · log(ps(y))
PCSA [26] F z′
y = zy −log(ps(y))+log( pt(y))
Norcal [63] F p′
y =
py/nγ
y
pbg+P py/nγ
y
, y /∈ bg
LogN [97] F z′
y = zy−(µy−miny(µy))
ςy
, y /∈ bg
FRACAL S+F z′
y = S(C(zy))/PC+1
j=1 S(C(zy))
proposed which use self-attention to directly learn object
proposals [8, 104], or diffusion-based methods which use
a de-noising process to learn bounding boxes [10] and segmentation masks [19]. However, all of these methods struggle to learn the rare classes when trained with long-tailed
data [20, 62] due to the insufficient rare samples. To this
end, FRACAL enhances the rare class performance using
a space-aware logit adjustment that can be easily applied
during inference.
Long-tailed image classification. In the past years, the
long-tailed image recognition problem has received great
attention, as demonstrated by many recent surveys [62,
87, 96] and newly created benchmarks [18, 74, 88]. In
long-tailed classification, the works could be split into two
groups, representation learning and classifier learning. Representation learning techniques aim to efficiently learn rare
class features using oversampling [27, 66, 90], contrastive
learning [13, 44, 102], using ensemble or fusion models [1, 12, 39, 41, 82], knowledge distillation [24, 41, 43],
knowledge transfer [55, 65, 103], sharpness aware minimisation [59, 100, 101] and neural collapse [42, 53, 99].
Classifier learning techniques aim to adjust the classifier in
favour of the rare classes via decoupled training [29, 33, 94],
margin adjustment [3, 7, 26, 32, 60, 68, 89, 98] and
cost-sensitive learning [14, 35, 83]. Among these works,
the Post-Calibrated Softmax Adjustment (PCSA) method
[26, 58, 60] distinguishes itself through both its strong performance and the absence of any training requirements.
However, most of the classifier and representation learning
techniques are hard to adopt in long-tailed object detection.
This difficulty arises from the larger imbalance inherent in
this task, amplified by the presence of the background class
[61, 87]. Moreover, the optimisation of models for this task
becomes more complex due to multiple sources of imbalance such as batch imbalance, class imbalance and task imbalance as outlined in this survey [62]. For this reason, we
develop FRACAL, which is a post-calibration method tailored to the long-tailed object detection task. Different from
post-calibration classification methods [26, 60], FRACAL
enhances the detection performance by leveraging class15140
Figure 2. During imbalanced object detection, the model makes more frequent class detections like hat and less rare class detections like
tiara both of which have strong upper location bias. FRACAL utilises fractal dimension and debiases the logits both in the frequency and
space axes, making fewer hat detections and more tiara detections that are both evenly spread in image space.
dependent space information derived from the fractal dimension. Through space-aware logit-adjustment, FRACAL
mitigates biases in both the detection’s location and classification axes.
Long-tailed object detection. The most prevalent technique is adaptive rare class re-weighting, which could be
applied using either the statistics of the mini-batch [28, 72,
79] or the statistics of the gradient [40, 73]. Other works
use adaptive classification margins based on the classifier’s
weight norms [38, 80], classification score [17, 25, 76], activation functions [2, 4], group hierarchies [46, 85] and ranking loss [95]. Many works use data resampling techniques
[17, 20, 33, 85, 90] or external rare class augmentation
[91, 92]. All these works optimise the model on the longtailed distribution and require the construction of a complicated and cumbersome training pipeline. In contrast, our
method operates during the model’s inference stage thus it
is easier to use and less evasive to the user’s codebase.
Norcal [63] was the first method to apply a postcalibration technique in imbalanced object detection,
achieving promising results without training the detector.
They proposed to calibrate only the foreground logits using
the train-set’s label statistics and applied a re-normalisation
step. LogN [97] proposed to use the model’s own predictions to estimate the class statistics and applied standardisation in the classification layer. However LogN, requires
forward-passing the whole training set through the model
to estimate the weights, thus it is slower than FRACAL,
which is not model-dependent. Also, both methods do not
utilise the spatial statistics of the classes which are valuable indicators since the classes and their location are correlated [34]. To this end, FRACAL balances the detectors
using both class and space information, largely surpassing
the performance of the previous methods. FRACAL can
be easily combined with two-stage softmax-based models
like MaskRCNN [22], or one-stage sigmoid detectors such
as GFLv2 [45] achieving great results without training or
additional inference cost.
Relation to previous works. In Table 1, we contrast our
work to previous post-calibration methods used in classification and object detection. As the Table suggests, all prior
methods use only frequency information and none of them
considers the space information.
3. Methodology
We show the overview of our approach in Fig.2. FRACAL is essentially a post-processing method that calibrates
the classification logits of the detector using precomputed
weights based on the class and space statistics of the trainset. The FRACAL weights can be stored in the memory,
thus during inference our method has insignificant overhead. Its effects on the detector are twofold, on the frequency axis, it decreases frequent class detections like hat
and increases rare class detections like tiara. On the space
axis, it produces more uniformly spaced detections for all
classes, by forcing e.g. both hats and tiaras to appear in all
locations and not just the top. Next, we analyse our method
in detail.
3.1. Background: Classification Calibration
Let fy(x; θ) = z be a classifier parameterised by θ, x the
input image, y the class, z the logit, ¯y is the model’s prediction and ps(y) and pt(y) the class priors on the train and test
distributions respectively. The post-calibration equation is:
¯y = arg max
y
(fy(x; θ) + log(pt(y)) − log(ps(y))). (1)
This has been numerously analysed in previous literature [3, 26, 51, 60, 68] and we derive it in Appendix. In
short, this shows that to get better performance, one can
align the model’s predictions with the test distribution, by
subtracting log(ps(y)) and adding log(pt(y)) in the logit
space. We now extend it to object detection.
3.2. Classification Calibration for Object Detection
In classification, p(y) can be easily defined using the
dataset’s statistics, b