Flash3D: Super-scaling Point Transformers through Joint Hardware-Geometry
Locality
Liyan Chen1, Gregory P. Meyer2, Zaiwei Zhang2, Eric M. Wolff2, Paul Vernaza2
1The University of Texas at Austin
2Cruise LLC
liyanc@cs.utexas.edu, eric.wolff@getcruise.com, paul.vernaza@getcruise.com
https://github.com/liyanc/Flash3DTransformer
Abstract
Recent efforts recognize the power of scale in 3D learning (e.g. PTv3) and attention mechanisms (e.g. FlashAttention). However, current point cloud backbones fail to
holistically unify geometric locality, attention mechanisms,
and GPU architectures in one view. In this paper, we introduce Flash3D Transformer, which aligns geometric locality and GPU tiling through a principled locality mechanism based on Perfect Spatial Hashing (PSH). The common
alignment with GPU tiling naturally fuses our PSH locality mechanism with FlashAttention at negligible extra cost.
This mechanism affords flexible design choices throughout
the backbone that result in superior downstream task results. Flash3D outperforms state-of-the-art PTv3 results on
benchmark datasets, delivering a 2.25x speed increase and
2.4x memory efficiency boost. This efficiency enables scaling to wider attention scopes and larger models without additional overhead. Such scaling allows Flash3D to achieve
even higher task accuracies than PTv3 under the same compute budget.
1. Introduction
Efficient and scalable processing of point clouds is crucial for a wide range of applications, including autonomous
driving [14, 15, 27, 35, 44], robotic navigation [24, 29, 38,
42, 45], and augmented reality [11, 30]. Point cloud backbones are essential architectures that extract meaningful
features from raw 3D data. Recent advancements [17, 18,
22, 39, 41] have explored various strategies to enhance the
performance of these backbones, particularly focusing on
how Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA) mechanisms can
be optimized for 3D point clouds. Windowing MHSA and
region shifting (e.g., Swin Transformers [21, 43]) enable
efficient local-global feature extraction, but scaling point
cloud backbones to larger point cloud sizes and model capacities remains challenging [21, 39, 41].
x N
GPU 
tile 
(SM)
GPU 
tile 
(SM)
GPU 
tile 
(SM)
Principled Locality Mechanism
FA2
FA2
FA2
FA2
FA2
FA2
Zero-Overhead Bucket-Swin
latency
Flash3D: 20ms
PTv3: 45ms
Figure 1. Effectiveness our Flash3D transformer by unifying geometric locality, FlashAttention (FA2), and GPU tiling architecture. Our unified perspective leads to drastically improved speed
and scalability of point transformers.
In this paper, we tackle the challenges of efficient and
scalable point cloud backbones by introducing Flash3D
Transformer, a new architecture that unifies geometric locality with GPU memory locality. This is achieved through
a principled locality mechanism based on Perfect Spatial
Hashing (PSH). Flash3D is designed to align point cloud
backbones with the tiling architecture of GPUs, leading
to marked improvements in both efficiency and scalability. Our work integrates a locality mechanism that bridges
geometric and GPU memory locality, enabling an efficient
mapping of 3D points into compact memory spaces. Benefiting from compact memory layouts, Flash3D introduces
a multilevel attention grouping method, Bucket-and-Swin,
precisely aligned with GPU tiling, allowing zero overhead
region shifting fused with FlashAttention-2 [6]. The joint
locality and efficiency boost are illustrated in Figure 1.
Our key contributions are summarized as follows:
• Unified geometric and GPU memory locality : Using
Perfect Spatial Hashing (PSH), we propose a principled
locality mechanism that brings together geometric and
memory locality, benefiting downstream feature quality
and operation throughput.
This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
6595
• Attention aligned with GPU tiling : We propose a
novel Bucket-and-Swin attention mechanism, structured
closely to GPU tiling, incorporating zero-overhead region
shifting and striding.
• Scalable Performance : Flash3D Transformer outperforms PTv3 on benchmark datasets, simultaneously
achieving a 2.25x speed increase and 2.4x memory efficiency boost.
2. Related Work
3D Point Transformers Many variations of Point Transformers have appeared recently, such as PTv1 [46],
PTv2 [40], PTv3 [41], FlatFormer [22], and OctFormer [39], each differing in their definitions of geometric
locality. PTv1 and PTv2 introduced foundational concepts
in point cloud transformers, focusing on capturing both
local and global geometric structures within point clouds
through intricate windowing of MHSA.
FlatFormer [22] demonstrated that partitioning point
clouds into equally sized windows benefits MHSA by enabling efficient batching. OctFormer [39] proposed octreebased neighborbood partitioning for fast window computation. Additionally, region shifting based on Swin Transformers has been utilized to aggregate and distribute global
information through subsequent local windowing, enhancing the network’s ability to capture both local and global
features [9, 21, 22]. PTv3 [41] incorporated such design principles and achieved state-of-the-art performance
by scaling up MHSA window sizes and parameter sizes.
However, by relying on abstractions of global serialization
and scattering of points and features, PTv3 overlooks GPU
architectural issues, incurring substantial and unnecessary
computational and memory costs (see Figure 2 and Section 3 for details). This highlights the need to holistically
integrate geometric locality with hardware considerations.
Varied definitions of geometric locality call for a general approach to encompass a family of such. Ideal geometric locality definitions should be flexible and computeefficient to represent striding and shifting and incorporate
global structures within point clouds. Variations among partition sizes lead to negligible differences in downstream task
performances while hindering compute efficiency [36, 39].
Therefore, we motivate our principled locality mechanism
to align flexible geometric locality definitions with evenly
sized windows, which allow regularly batched computations on GPUs and saturate GPU compute throughput. Our
Bucket-and-Swin attention offers an efficient method for
striding and shifting on top of properly localized points by
leveraging our principled locality mechanism.
FlashAttention FlashAttention algorithms [6, 7, 32]
leverage the tiling structure of GPU chips and optimize attention mechanisms by retaining intermediate results onchip and carefully localizing computations. Retention
of intermediate results on-chip helps FlashAttention algorithms to reduce quadratic memory cost down to a linear
one [7, 25, 33, 34]. Partitioning input arrays into tiles
aligned with GPU tiling structures maximizes computation
throughput. Given that GPU architectures have maintained
a tiling structure for over two decades—a fundamental design aspect unlikely to change [13]—these methods aim to
maximize GPU utilization for a range of GPU chips.
These two principles motivate our design choices of
Bucket-and-Swin attention. We partition point cloud features into tiles fit in GPU tiles; each tile is fetched on-the-fly
based on logical assignments; logical partitions and fetching are fused with FlashAttention-2 CUDA kernel.
Perfect Spatial Hashing (PSH) Spatial hashing was
originally proposed to efficiently locate and query spatially
sparse data points [12, 23]. To enhance memory locality and
computational efficiency, researchers introduced the concept of perfectness [5], compacting the hash table into a
contiguous linear array in memory. This approach resulted
in improved memory access patterns and query speed [20].
Later, [1] proposed a parallelized PSH construction on
GPUs, achieving exceptionally fast constructions even on
early GPUs by leveraging their massive parallel processing
capabilities and placing buckets within GPU tiles.
In our work, we focus on perfectness, propose a principled locality mechanism, and remove the traditional table
indexing structure. We focus on hashing a large number
of points into a contiguous memory array for MHSA. This
simplification aligns with our goal of unifying geometric locality with GPU memory locality to optimize performance.
3. Preliminaries
In order to explain how Flash3D achieves fast performance,
we must first understand the bottlenecks in previous work.
Figure 2 depicts the high-level dataflow associated with a
method such as PTv3 (note that some layers are omitted
for the sake of simplicity of exposition). Each numbered
rectangle represents a float stored in memory. We assume
the data has been pre-sorted to ensure contiguous floats are
likely to be close in terms of some meaningful metric.
Before the data can be processed, it must be loaded from
main memory into the L1 cache (which is practically equivalent to shared memory in GPU jargon). An H100 can perform this step at a rate of roughly 1 TFloat/s. Although this
seems like an impressive number, it is dwarfed by the maximum achievable FLOP throughput of the GPU, which is in
excess of 60 TFloat/s. In our case, the compute-intensive
step consists of FlashAttention, which can perform in excess of 500 TFLOPs/s (albeit at reduced precision).
After writing results to memory, PTv3 then performs a
global reordering of the points in order to communicate in6596
Figure 2. High-level schematic overview of PTv3. Numbered rectangles represent locations in memory. Adjacent rectangles are adjacent
in memory. Arrows indicate data movement. See Section 3 for details.
Figure 3. High-level schematic overview of Flash3D. Flash3D performs multiple rounds of attention with different neighborhood definitions via our bucket-and-swin approach, which saves an expensive global shuffle in each round. See Section 4 for details.
formation across a different set of neighborhoods. As depicted in the figure, this step is orders of magnitude slower
than the other steps. This is because the GPU is optimized
to transfer large amounts of data in transactions of contiguous blocks. Transferring data between random locations is
analogous to using many buckets (memory transactions) to
move water one drop (float) at a time—this process can only
be efficient if we fill the buckets (by transferring the data in
contiguous chunks)1.
1Though global shuffling through raw DRAM channels bottlenecks at
0.1TFloat/s, Flash3D effectively coalesces shuffling in L2 cache and ap4. Method
From the preceding discussion, it is clear that the global
shuffle step of PTv3 is a key bottleneck. Our key idea is
to mitigate this bottleneck through our Bucket-and-Swin
strategy. In this approach, illustrated in Figure 3, we initially bucket the points into spatially similar neighborhoods
using hash functions. This involves an up-front global shufproximates 1TFloat/s limit in reality. One million points FP16[1M, 3]
cost 6MB memory while H100 has 50MB L2 cache to coalesce shuffled
results, write well-packed results, and maximize DRAM bandwidth.
6597
fle operation that places points in the same contiguous block
of memory if they are in the same bucket.
In subsequent iterations, instead of repeating a slow
global shuffle in order to communicate information using
different neighborhoods, we logically shuffle the buckets to
yield different neighborhoods for attention. This shuffle is
logical in the sense that it does not involve any permutation
of bytes in memory—instead, we simply load the appropriate buckets into L1 just before calculating attentions. To
return to the water analogy, this is akin to transferring water
using full buckets of water (by loading entire point-buckets
into L1) instead of nearly empty buckets. We are thus able
to mostly mitigate the global shuffling bottleneck.
Implementing this strategy efficiently involves a few
non-trivial details, which we elaborate upon in the following subsections.
4.1. Principled Locality Mechanism with PSH
Our principled locality mechanism leverages Perfect Spatial Hashing (PSH) [1, 20] to map spatially sparse 3D point
clouds into compact and contiguous arrays. PSH constructs
a bijection to scatter 3D points. In the output array, memory
address proximity implies spatial proximity.
Input and Output The PSH algorithm takes as input the
point coordinates C ∈ RN ×3, representing N points in 3D
space, and the bucket capacity S, defining the maximum
points per bucket. It outputs the bucket IDs bucket id ∈
ZN , assigning each point to a bucket, and bucket offsets bucket offset ∈ ZN , indexing each point’s position within its assigned bucket. The index of the i-th
point can be determined bybucket base[bucket id[i]]+
bucket offset[i]. When buckets are concatenated backto-back, the resulting indices are guaranteed to be contiguous, and scattering points according to these indices produces a contiguous array of points. We describe our full
PSH construction algorithm in Alg 1 and Alg 2.
Stage Orchestration In Flash3D, PSH orchestrates three
key components within each transformer stage. First, PSH
groups spatially adjacent points into contiguous memory arrays and produces bucket id, bucket offset. The resulted array suits point-wise MLPs and LayerNorm. The
second component maps buckets to attention scopes during FlashAttention without extra cost. Lastly, the bucket
structure directs a tile-level in-bucket pooling layer. Because points within each bucket are geometrically local,
pooling operations are confined within buckets, reducing
the need for costly global neighbor queries. This localized
pooling achieves high computational efficiency by retaining
geometric coherence in point clusters, enabling efficient,
spatially-aware feature aggregation throughout the model.
Bucket rebalancing Ideally, we would assign a bucket to
each poin