DFormerv2: Geometry Self-Attention for RGBD Semantic Segmentation
Bo-Wen Yin, Jiao-Long Cao, Ming-Ming Cheng, Qibin Hou *
VCIP, CS, Nankai University
bowenyin@mail.nankai.edu.cn, houqb@nankai.edu.cn
Abstract
Recent advances in scene understanding benefit a lot
from depth maps because of the 3D geometry information,
especially in complex conditions ( e.g., low light and overexposed). Existing approaches encode depth maps along
with RGB images and perform feature fusion between them
to enable more robust predictions. Taking into account that
depth can be regarded as a geometry supplement for RGB
images, a straightforward question arises: Do we really
need to explicitly encode depth information with neural networks as done for RGB images? Based on this insight, in
this paper, we investigate a new way to learn RGBD feature
representations and present DFormerv2, a strong RGBD
encoder that explicitly uses depth maps as geometry priors rather than encoding depth information with neural networks. Our goal is to extract the geometry clues from the
depth and spatial distances among all the image patch tokens, which will then be used as geometry priors to allocate
attention weights in self-attention. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that DFormerv2 exhibits exceptional performance in various RGBD semantic segmentation benchmarks. Code is available at: https://github.com/VCIPRGBD/DFormer.
1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, aiming at assigning each pixel in
an image to a specific pre-defined category label, has been
a fundamental area of research in computer vision due to
its broad range of applications, such as in intelligent transportation systems and autonomous driving [30]. However, approaches based solely on RGB data often suffer
significant performance degradation in complex scenarios,
such as cluttered indoor environments or low-light conditions. In recent years, advancements in 3D modular sensors
have made depth data more accessible. Integrating RGBD data makes scene understanding more robust and accurate and thus becomes pivotal in advancing high-level vi*Qibin Hou is the corresponding author.
Encoder
Fusion
Encoder
Decoder
Unified
RGBD
Encoder Decoder
Dual Encoder with Fusion Modules
An Unified RGBD Encoder
Use Depth as Prior
RGB modality
Depth modality
Design focus
RGB modality
Depth modality
Encoder
RGB modality
Depth modality Geometry Prior
Decoder
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1. Comparisons among the main RGBD segmentation
pipelines and our approach. (a) Use dual encoders to encode
RGB and depth respectively and design fusion modules to fusion
them [28, 61]; (b) Adopt an unified RGBD encoder to extract and
fuse RGBD features [1, 59]; (c) Our DFormerv2 use depth to form
a geometry prior of the scene and then enhance the visual features.
sion tasks. Furthermore, RGB-D data have demonstrated
remarkable potential, surpassing the RGB-based paradigm
in various downstream tasks, including autonomous driving [26], SLAM [50], and robotics [36].
Fig. 1(a) presents the architecture of current mainstream
RGB-D models. As depicted, it utilizes a dual encoder architecture [61, 62], wherein one encoder extracts features
from the RGB modality, while the other processes depth information. Meanwhile, a fusion strategy is performed to
achieve interaction between the information of these two
modalities during the encoding process. Despite the success, the majority existing RGBD segmentation approaches
adopt identical backbone architectures to extract features
from both RGB and depth data for fusion, neglecting the
inherent differences between the RGB and depth.
A series of studies have sought to identify optimal methods for processing depth maps and integrating them with
This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
19345
Input Image Vanilla Attention Window Attention Local Attention Geometry Attention
Input Image Vanilla Attention Window Attention Local Attention Geometry Attention
Figure 2. Comparison between geometry self-attention (GSA) and other attention mechanisms, i.e., vanilla attention [10], window attention [9, 35], and local attention [52, 57]. The ‘star’ sign means the current query’s position. In GSA, colors closer to red represent smaller
decay rates, while colors farer away red represent larger ones. In other attention mechanisms, the bright color means the receptive field.
RGB data. Asyformer [11] employs a dual-stream asymmetric backbone, i.e., using a more efficient encoder for
depth data to reduce redundant parameters during feature
extraction. PrimKD [20] proposes a knowledge distillation
(KD)-based method to guide multimodal fusion in RGB-D
semantic segmentation, with an emphasis on leveraging the
primary RGB modality. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 1(b),
DFormer [59] presents an efficient RGB-D model that encodes both RGB and depth data in a unified encoder via
representation learning manners [23, 47], yet allocates more
computational resources to processing the RGB data. These
methods acknowledge that RGB and depth carry distinct
information, each contributing differently to semantic segmentation. However, they fail to account for the unique
characteristics of the depth modality fully. In conclusion,
how to effectively and efficiently utilize depth information
remains an open question and warrants further exploration.
In this paper, taking into account the physical meanings
of depth maps that reflect the geometrical information of the
given scenes, we consider the way of utilizing depth maps
from a new perspective. Unlike previous works that use
neural networks to simultaneously encode RGB images and
depth maps as shown in Fig. 1, we propose directly employing depth maps as geometry priors and using them to guide
weight distributions in self-attention, producing a new attention mechanism, called Geometry Self-Attention (GSA).
An illustration of how the proposed GSA works and its
differences from other self-attention variants can be found
in Fig. 2. In each building block, we model the geometric
and spatial relationships among all the patch tokens based
on the GSA, a more efficient way to fuse RGB and depth information. Our method requires no extra layers to process
depth maps and hence needs fewer learnable parameters and
computations compared to other types of RGBD segmentation methods. In addition, to reduce the computational
burden of vanilla self-attention, we also adopt an axes decomposition operation that decomposes self-attention along
both spatial axes of the features.
Based on Geometry Self-Attention, we construct a powerful RGB-D vision backbone, called DFormerv2. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of DFormerv2 on popular
RGB-D semantic segmentation benchmarks, e.g., NYU
DepthV2 [42], SUNRGBD [43], and Deliver [62]. By
adding a small decoder head on top of the DFormerv2, our
approach sets new state-of-the-art records with less computational cost compared to previous methods. Remarkably,
our base scale model, DFormerv2-B, achieves equal performance with the second-best method Gemnifuision (MiTB5) [28], i.e., 57.7% mIoU on NYU DepthV2, with less
than half of the computation costs. Meanwhile, our largest
model DFormerv2-L is able to achieve 58.4% mIoU on
NYU DepthV2 with 95.5M parameters. Compared with
other methods, our DFormerv2 achieves the best trade-off
between segmentation performance and computations.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• To our best knowledge, our work marks the first successful attempt to combine depth information with spatial information as a geometry prior and apply it to the neural
network.
• We propose Geometry Self-Attention which introduces
geometry prior to self-attention, to construct an efficient
RGB-D encoder, termed DFormerv2.
• Our method achieves new state-of-the-art performance
with less than half the computational cost of the best current methods on three popular RGB-D semantic segmentation datasets.
2. Related Work
2.1. RGB-D Semantic Segmentation
Semantic segmentation [64], as one of the core pursuits in
computer vision, aims to categorize each pixel in an image
into a specific category. Recently, significant developments
in deep learning technologies [6, 7, 18, 44, 45] have been
made in this field. However, some real-world scenes [13,
27, 32, 33, 56] are still challenging to understand using
only RGB images, which do not provide sufficient textures,
especially in low illumination and fast-moving scenarios.
To address this issue, researchers [63, 65] propose to utilize depth, which contains 3D geometry information for
the scene, to enhance RGB semantic segmentation, known
as RGB-D semantic segmentation. Since then, a series of
works have been proposed to achieve the fusion of RGB-D
data and leverage the additional information to capture more
19346
Depth map
Depth and Spatial Prior
Fusion Operation
𝐷 𝑆
𝐺
𝐻𝑊 × 𝐻𝑊
𝐻𝑊 × 𝐻𝑊𝐻𝑊 × 𝐻𝑊
(a) Generation of geometry prior (b) Visualization of geometry prior
Spatial location the current query token
Geometry Prior
Figure 3. Illustration of the geometry prior. (a) Generation process of the geometry prior. (b) Some visualization of the geometry prior,
where the ‘blue star’ means the current query.
details. Here, we delve into the RGB-D fusion schemes and
analyze their characteristics.
The current mainstream methods [25, 39] put a lot of
effort into designing interaction modules to fuse the RGB
and depth features encoded by two parallel pretrained backbones. For instance, methods such as CMX [61], TokenFusion [54], GeminiFusion [28] dynamically fuse the RGB-D
representations from RGB and depth encoders and aggregate them in the decoder. These methods significantly push
the performance boundaries in the applications of RGBD semantic segmentation. Nevertheless, they still face
two common issues: (1) Treating RGB and depth maps
equally with two parallel backbones brings significantly
higher computational cost compared to methods based on
RGB data; (2) The used backbones are pretrained with RGB
images but take an image-depth pair as input during finetuning. The inconsistency between the input causes a huge
representation distribution shift.
Recently, DFormer [59] proposed an RGB-D representation learning framework and utilizes a unified backbone that
pretrained on RGB-D pairs to overcome the two issues. It
notices the difference in information density between these
two modalities and observes that depth information only requires a small portion of channels to encode. Although it
achieves accurate prediction with high efficiency, it overlooks the intrinsic characteristics of depth modality and
merely allocates depth with lower computation cost. Differently, in this paper, we propose to generate the geometry
prior via depth from the perspective of data characteristics.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to explicitly use the geometry information of depth without any
extra encoding layers.
2.2. Vision Transformer and Prior Knowledge
Vision Transformer (ViT) [10] was the first to introduce
transformer architecture to visual tasks, where images are
split into small, non-overlapped patch sequences. The
biggest difference from CNNs [22, 24, 34] is that transformers [8, 9, 35, 49] use attention as an alternative to convolution layers to enable global context modeling. However,
vanilla self-attention incurs a heavy computational burden,
as it computes pairwise feature affinities across all patches.
Various sparse attention mechanisms [19, 35, 55, 60, 69]
have been proposed to alleviate the huge computation cost
of self-attention. At the same time, researchers have presented many studies [17, 37, 46, 48, 51] to incorporate prior
knowledge into the transformer model to enhance its representation capacity. The original transformers [10] utilize
position encoding to provide positional information for each
token. For vision tasks, swin-transformer [35] proposes to
use relative positional encoding instead of the original absolute position encoding. In contrast, we propose transferring depth into geometry prior knowledge and introducing
it into self-attention, termed geometry self-attention. Compared to the position prior, our geometry prior can model
the relationships in the 3D domain across the whole image.
3. Methodology
3.1. Geometry Prior Generation
In the vision transformer, the 2D input image of size h × w
is evenly split into HW small patches, where H and W
are the numbers of patches per row and column, respectively. Each patch denoted as Pij is uniquely positioned
with a two-dimensional coordinate within the spatial domain, where i and j index the row and column, respectively.
When the associated depth map is given, the patch in the
depth map at the corresponding position reflects its distance
from the camera plane. Based on these two types of priors, we model the geometrical relationships among all the
patches and embed them into the self-attention mechanism
to form our geometry self-attention.
To be specific, for the depth prior, we perform the average pooling operation for all pixels within the depth patch at
position (i, j) to represent its depth location zij and calculate the distances between each pair of depth patches, which
can be defined as:
Dij,i′j′ = |zij − zi′j′|, (1)
where Dij,i′j′ represents the depth distance between the
patches at positions (i, j) and (i′, j′). D forms a depth relationship matrix of shape HW × HW .
The depth relationship matrix D does not contain the
spatial distance information, which is also vital to form the
19347
input feature
𝑥
C × 𝐻 × 𝑊
𝑄𝑥
𝐺𝑦
𝐺 𝑥
𝐻𝑊 × 𝐻𝑊 𝐻 × 𝑊𝑊
𝑊 × 𝐻𝐻
𝐺𝑒𝑜𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑛𝑦
𝐺eo𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑛
𝐻𝑊 × 𝑊
𝐻𝑊 × 𝐻 𝐻𝑊 × 𝐻𝑊
C × 𝐻 × 𝑊
C × 𝐻 × 𝑊
𝑥𝑜𝑢𝑡
(c) Geometry Self-Attention
Matrix multiplication
Element-wise multiplication
Feature Decomposition
RGB image
ℎ × 𝑤 × 3
Patch Embedding
×𝑁1
ℎ/4 × 𝑤/4 × 𝐶
Patch Merging
RGB-D
Block