Focusing on Tracks for Online Multi-Object Tracking
Kyujin Shim Kangwook Ko Yujin Yang Changick Kim
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{kjshim1028, kokangook623, ujin.y, changick }@kaist.ac.kr
Abstract
Multi-object tracking (MOT) is a critical task in computer vision, requiring the accurate identification and continuous tracking of multiple objects across video frames.
However, current state-of-the-art methods mainly rely on a
global optimization technique and multi-stage cascade association strategy, and those approaches often overlook the
specific characteristics of assignment task in MOT and useful detection results that may represent occluded objects.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel TrackFocused Online Multi-Object Tracker (TrackTrack) with two
key strategies: Track-Perspective-Based Association (TPA)
and Track-Aware Initialization (TAI). The TPA strategy associates each track with the most suitable detection result by
choosing the one with the minimum distance from all available detection results in a track-perspective manner. On
the other hand, TAI precludes the generation of spurious
tracks in the track-aware aspect by suppressing track initialization of detection results that heavily overlap with current active tracks and more confident detection results. Extensive experiments on MOT17, MOT20, and DanceTrack
demonstrate that our TrackTrack outperforms current stateof-the-art trackers, offering improved robustness and accuracy across diverse and challenging tracking scenarios.
1. introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) is a fundamental task in computer vision that plays a crucial role in various applications
[10, 20, 24, 26, 38, 41, 60]. However, MOT still faces diverse challenges due to the dynamic and unpredictable nature of real-world environments, including occlusions, similar appearances between different objects, and varying densities and motions of tracking targets. Many state-of-the-art
methods [14, 56, 57, 61] follow the tracking-by-detection
(TBD) framework, the dominant approach in MOT, to solve
these problems. In this framework, trackers first detect objects in each frame and adequately link them to form complete trajectories across a video. More specifically, the detection results are compared with tracks, which are trackFigure 1. Comparisons of HOTA scores on the test set of MOT17,
MOT20, and DanceTrack with our TrackTrack and other stateof-the-art methods. The radius of each circle means its HOTA
score on DanceTrack. Our TrackTrack shows the highest and most
consistently outperforming results on all datasets, demonstrating
strong robustness and adaptability in every tracking scenario.
ing results until the previous frame, and associated with the
same objects using various distance measurements such as
Intersection over Union (IoU) [8, 29, 61] and cosine distances of appearance features [1, 31, 36]. With the recent
development of object detection techniques [18, 50], most
approaches mainly focus on improving data association by
building multiple association stages [33, 61] and introducing additional metrics, such as pseudo-depth [29] or moving
direction [8, 56], while solving the matching between tracks
and detection results with the Hungarian algorithm [34].
The Hungarian algorithm [34] is widely recognized for
finding the minimum global cost matching between two independent sets, making it highly suitable for tasks requiring
the lowest total costs, such as allocating workers to tasks in
a factory. However, applying this algorithm to MOT during data association between tracks and detection results
presents additional challenges. In MOT, tracks represent actual objects from previous frames, whereas detection results
are object candidates of the current frame. Unlike matching
between independent sets, as in job allocation to workers,
This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
11687
(a) Result of Hungarian matching
(b) Result of our Track-Perspective-Based Association (TPA)
Figure 2. Visualization of performance enhancement of our TPA
compared to typical Hungarian matching. The symbol “T” means
track, and “D” means detection result. The detection results with
green boxes are high-confidence detection results, and the detection results with yellow boxes are deleted high-confidence detection results during NMS. Our proposed TPA successfully maintains track ID through accurate association, even in challenging
cases with severe overlapping and fast movements.
tracks and detection results are highly interdependent, as
both represent the same underlying objects, and there is a
correct answer for each assignment. Consequently, framing
the data association problem in MOT as selecting the optimal match for each track would be more appropriate than
solely minimizing global costs, particularly in scenarios involving occlusions, which critically impact tracking performance, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
On the other hand, many conventional methods [8, 14,
33, 56, 61] attempt to incorporate low-confidence detection results, which may represent partially visible objects,
by employing a multi-stage matching cascade. However, in
this cascade, it first matches high-confidence detection results with tracks and subsequently matches low-confidence
detection results only with the remaining tracks. Thus, it
leads to suboptimal utilization of low-confidence detection
results that can be better options for certain tracks, lowering
tracking performance in scenes with occlusion.
To address these issues, we propose a Track-PerspectiveBased Association (TPA) method, which thoroughly
utilizes all available detection results, including highconfidence and low-confidence detection results and even
high-confidence detection results that are discarded during
non-maximum suppression (NMS), while focusing on the
local perspective of each track. Additionally, we introduce
Track-Aware Initialization (TAI), which selectively initializes new tracks only with the most feasible detected boxes
among the redundant candidates. More specifically, our
TPA compares every pair of tracks and detection results simultaneously through a single joint association stage to improve the utilization of every candidate. Then, it iteratively
associates tracks and detection results that present the minimum distance while prioritizing local matching precision,
ensuring each track is matched with the most appropriate
detection result in each track-perspective manner. Meanwhile, TAI excludes detection results that significantly overlap with active tracks and other more confident detection
results from the set of track initialization candidates, preventing spurious tracks and contributing to a more reliable
tracking process. Together, these methods form the basis
of our novel tracker, Track-Focused Online Multi-Object
Tracker (TrackTrack), designed to enhance robustness and
accuracy in challenging tracking scenarios with improved
data association and initialization process. Extensive experiments on MOT17 [12], MOT20 [11], and DanceTrack [48]
demonstrate that our TrackTrack consistently outperforms
state-of-the-art trackers, highlighting its robustness and effectiveness in diverse scenarios, as in Fig. 1.
The main contributions of our work are:
• We introduce a novel Track-Focused Online MultiObject Tracker (TrackTrack) with two main components of Track-Perspective-Based Association (TPA)
and Track-Aware Initialization (TAI).
• We propose TPA that prioritizes local matching accuracy, enhancing robustness during data association
by ensuring each track is merged with the most suitable detection result while considering every pairwise
distance with all available detection results through a
single-stage joint association.
• We present TAI that leverages active tracks to prevent
the creation of redundant tracks during the track initialization process and improves overall tracking stability.
• We demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness
of our TrackTrack through extensive experiments
on MOT17, MOT20, and DanceTrack. It consistently achieves state-of-the-art performance across all
datasets compared to previous cutting-edge methods.
2. Related Work
2.1. Tracking-by-detection
The tracking-by-detection (TBD) paradigm, which separates the tracking task into two distinct subproblems of
11688
object detection and data association, is the predominant
approach in MOT. With the recent advancements in highperformance object detectors, such as Faster R-CNN [37],
Feature Pyramid Networks (FPN) [28], YOLOX [18], and
YOLOv7 [50], most methods focus on developing the association aspect, primarily through accurate affinity or distance estimation between detected objects. In this context,
various techniques are proposed, including learnable neural solver [5] and probabilistic tracklet scoring [40]. More
specifically, Xu et al. [54] introduce Spatial-Temporal Relation Networks that predict distances between detected objects by aggregating their appearance, location, and topology information. Similarly, Sun et al. [49] propose a Deep
Affinity Network to estimate pairwise affinities between detected results of distinct frames in an end-to-end fashion.
Motion model-based trackers [22, 31, 47, 51], which are
straightforward and highly effective MOT algorithms with
state-of-the-art performance, are also actively suggested.
They typically predict the subsequent locations of each previous track using a motion model, usually the Kalman Filter [23], and associate the tracks with current detection results using their pairwise distances and the Hungarian algorithm [34]. Building on this standard tracking pipeline,
various techniques are presented for better data association.
For example, some improve their Kalman filter-based motion model by considering confidence scores of detection
results [13, 22] or the camera motion of each video [57].
Also, diverse kinds of distance metrics using Re-ID features
[36, 51], pseudo-depth [29], moving direction [8], and detection confidence [56] are newly suggested.
2.2. Data Association
Data association, which targets accurate merging between
detected objects and existing tracks, is an essential part of
MOT systems. Beyond the limitations of early methods
[2, 16, 35] that often require high computational costs or
excessive prior knowledge, such as the number of targets,
diverse data association schemes are proposed in contemporary multi-object trackers. For example, SORT [4] suggests simple matching between detected results and previous tracks based on their pairwise spatial distances, and
DeepSORT [52] presents a matching cascade that offers priority to more recent tracks while treating newborn tracks
through a separate stage. ByteTrack [61] introduces a multistep association process that first matches high-confidence
detection results to existing tracks and subsequently associates low-confidence detection results with remaining
tracks to reduce lost cases of tracks. In LG-Track [33],
Meng et al. further divide detected boxes into four categories based on their localization and classification confidence scores and then sequentially match them to tracks
through four individual stages of association. Most recently,
Huang et al. [21] propose decomposed associating strategies to refine its original association results by decomposing the conventional matching problem into several subproblems. However, most methods, including the aforementioned trackers, still perform data association through
a global optimization and multi-stage matching scheme. In
contrast, our tracker better solves the association task with
our Track-Perspective-Based Association (TPA) approach,
which prioritizes local matching precision and fully incorporates all feasible detection results through a single joint
association scheme. Also, during TPA, detection results
discarded by NMS are employed, which are neglected in
most trackers. Simultaneously, our Track-Aware Initialization (TAI) enhances the track initialization process, contributing to overall tracking stability.
2.3. Considering Every Detection Results
Prior to the advent of deep learning-based methods, the
strategy of leveraging all detection proposals in multi-object
tracking is investigated in early methods. For instance, Wu
and Nevatia [53] suggest a method for detecting multiple
partially occluded humans in single images by employing
a Bayesian combination of edgelet part detectors, which
models individuals as assemblies of body parts. Leibe et al.
[25] propose a coupled detection and trajectory estimation
framework, addressing multi-object tracking as a joint optimization of detection and trajectory estimation. A generative model is also utilized to estimate probabilistic occupancy maps of the ground plane for a multi-people tracking
system [15]. On the other hand, Breitenstein et al. [6, 7]
introduce an online tracking-by-detection approach that utilizes a detector confidence particle filter and unreliable information sources for robust tracking. These methodologies underscore the efficacy of incorporating all detection
results, complemented by partial likelihoods, to achieve robust multi-object tracking in challenging environments.
3. Method
In this section, we introduce our proposed tracker, TrackFocused Multi-Object Tracker (TrackTrack). Unlike most
methods that treat the association between tracks and detection results as a global cost optimization problem, we focus
on track and fully utilize all the redundant detection results,
which are object candidates, by Track-Perspective-Based
Association (TPA) and Track-Aware Initialization (TAI). In
the following subsections, we describe the details of TPA
and TAI, followed by the overall tracking pipeline.
3.1. Track-Perspective-Based Association (TPA)
Most TBD-based track