DepthSplat: Connecting Gaussian Splatting and Depth
Haofei Xu1,2 Songyou Peng1 Fangjinhua Wang1 Hermann Blum1,4 Daniel Barath1
Andreas Geiger2 Marc Pollefeys1,3
1ETH Zurich 2University of T¨ubingen, T¨ubingen AI Center 3Microsoft 4University of Bonn
haofeixu.github.io/depthsplat
Validation curves of depth prediction error
Input & GT
Image 1: DepthImage 2: DepthNovel View
MVSplatDepthSplat
B
e
t
t
e
r
 
G
e
o
m
e tr y &
R
e
n
d
e
r
i
n
g
Depth
U
n
s
u
p
e
r
v
is e d  P re
-tr
a
i
n
i
n
g
3DGS
Figure 1. DepthSplat enables cross-task interactions between Gaussian splatting and depth . Left: Better depth leads to improved
Gaussian splatting reconstruction. Right: Unsupervised depth pre-training with Gaussian splatting leads to reduced depth prediction error.
Abstract
Gaussian splatting and single-view depth estimation are typically studied in isolation. In this paper, we present DepthSplat to connect Gaussian splatting and depth estimation
and study their interactions. More specifically, we first contribute a robust multi-view depth model by leveraging pretrained monocular depth features, leading to high-quality
feed-forward 3D Gaussian splatting reconstructions. We
also show that Gaussian splatting can serve as an unsupervised pre-training objective for learning powerful depth
models from large-scale multi-view posed datasets. We validate the synergy between Gaussian splatting and depth estimation through extensive ablation and cross-task transfer
experiments. Our DepthSplat achieves state-of-the-art performance on ScanNet, RealEstate10K and DL3DV datasets
in terms of both depth estimation and novel view synthesis,
demonstrating the mutual benefits of connecting both tasks.
In addition, DepthSplat enables feed-forward reconstruction
from 12 input views (512 × 960 resolutions) in 0.6 seconds.
1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis [4, 82] and depth prediction [20, 44]
are two fundamental tasks in computer vision, serving as the
driving force behind numerous applications ranging from
augmented reality to robotics and autonomous driving. There
have been notable advancements in both areas recently.
For novel view synthesis, 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [29] has emerged as a popular technique due to
its impressive real-time performance while attaining high
visual fidelity. Recently, advances in feed-forward 3DGS
models [7, 9, 48] have been introduced to alleviate the need
for tedious per-scene optimization, also enabling few-view
3D reconstruction. The state-of-the-art sparse-view method
MVSplat [9] relies on feature matching-based multi-view
depth estimation [65] to localize the 3D Gaussian positions,
which makes it suffer from similar limitations (e.g., occlusions, texture-less regions, and reflective surfaces) as other
multi-view depth methods [18, 25, 44, 56, 71].
On the other hand, significant progress has been made in
monocular depth estimation, with recent models [19, 22, 28,
40, 69, 74] achieving robust predictions on diverse in-thewild data. However, these depths typically lack consistent
scales across multiple views, constraining their performance
in downstream tasks like 3D reconstruction [59, 73].
The integration of 3DGS with single-view depth estimation presents a compelling solution to overcome the individual limitations of each technique while at the same
time enhancing their strengths. To this end, we introduce
This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
16453
DepthSplat, which exploits the complementary nature of
sparse-view feed-forward 3DGS and robust monocular depth
estimation to improve the performance for both tasks.
Specifically, we first contribute a robust multi-view
depth model by integrating pre-trained monocular depth features [70] to the multi-view feature matching branch, which
not only maintains the consistency of multi-view depth models but also leads to more robust results in situations that are
hard to match (e.g., occlusions, texture-less regions and reflective surfaces). The predicted multi-view depth maps are
then unprojected to 3D as the Gaussian centers, and we use
an additional lightweight network to predict other remaining
Gaussian parameters. They are combined together to achieve
novel view synthesis with the splatting operation [29].
While previous methods [1, 11, 31] also try to fuse monocular and multi-view depths, they usually rely on sophisticated
architectures. In contrast, we identify the power of off-theshelf pre-trained monocular depth models and propose to
augment multi-view cost volumes with monocular features,
leading to a simpler model and stronger performance.
Thanks to our improved multi-view depth model, the quality of novel view synthesis with Gaussian splatting is also
significantly enhanced (see Fig. 1 left). In addition, our Gaussian splatting module is fully differentiable, which requires
only photometric supervision to optimize all model components. This provides a new, unsupervised way to pre-train
depth prediction models on large-scale multi-view posed
datasets without requiring ground truth geometry information. The pre-trained depth model can be further fine-tuned
for specific depth tasks and achieves superior results over
training from scratch (see Fig. 1 right, where unsupervised
pre-training leads to improved performance).
We conduct extensive experiments on the large-scale TartanAir [58], ScanNet [14] and RealEstate10K [82] datasets
for depth estimation and Gaussian splatting tasks, as well as
the recently introduced DL3DV [32] dataset, which features
complex real-world scenes and thus is more challenging.
Under various evaluation settings, our DepthSplat achieves
state-of-the-art results. We also achieve promising feedforward reconstruction results of large-scale or 360 scenes
from 12 input views (512 × 960 resolutions) in 0.6 seconds.
The strong performance on both tasks demonstrates the mutual benefits of connecting Gaussian splatting and depth.
2. Related Work
Multi-View Depth Estimation . As a core component of
classical multi-view stereo pipelines [44], multi-view depth
estimation exploits multi-view photometric consistency
across multiple images to perform feature matching and predict the depth map of the reference image. In recent years,
many learning-based methods [6, 15, 18, 25, 56, 57, 71] have
been proposed to improve depth accuracy. Though these
learning-based methods significantly improve the depth quality compared to traditional methods [23, 44, 67], they cannot
handle challenging situations where the multi-view photometric consistency assumption is not guaranteed, e.g., occlusions, low-textured areas, and non-Lambertian surfaces.
Monocular Depth Estimation . Recently, we have witnessed significant progress in depth estimation from a single
image [2, 28, 40, 69, 74], and existing methods can produce surprisingly accurate results on diverse in-the-wild data.
However, monocular depth methods inherently suffer from
scale ambiguities, which makes it challenging to use them
for downstream tasks like 3D reconstruction [ 73]. In this
paper, we leverage the powerful features from a pre-trained
monocular depth model [70] to augment feature-matching
based multi-view depth estimation, which not only maintains the multi-view consistency but also leads to significantly improved robustness in challenging situations such as
low-textured regions and reflective surfaces.
Feed-Forward Gaussian Splatting. Several feed-forward
3D Gaussian splatting models [7–10, 48, 51, 62, 68, 77] have
been proposed in literature thanks to its efficiency and ability
to handle sparse views. In particular, pixelSplat [7] and Splatter Image [48] predict 3D Gaussians from image features,
while MVSplat [9] encodes the feature matching information
with cost volumes and achieves better geometry. However, it
inherently suffers from the limitation of feature matching in
challenging situations like texture-less regions and reflective
surfaces. In this paper, we propose to integrate monocular features from pre-trained monocular depth models [70]
for more robust depth prediction and 3D Gaussian reconstruction. Another line of work like LGM [51], GRM [68],
and GS-LRM [77] relies significantly on the training data
and compute, discarding explicit feature matching cues and
learning priors purely from data. This makes them expensive
to train (e.g., GS-LRM [77] is trained with 64 A100 GPUs
for 2 days), while our model can be trained in 2 days with
4 GPUs. Moreover, our Gaussian splatting module enables
pre-training depth model from large-scale multi-view posed
datasets without ground truth depth supervision.
Depth and Gaussian Splatting . Flash3D [ 49] explores a
pre-trained monocular depth model [39] for single-image 3D
Gaussian reconstruction. In contrast, we target large-scale
scene reconstruction from multiple views. TranSplat [ 76]
leverages monocular depth to improve Gaussian reconstruction. However, a crucial difference is that TranSplat uses
monocular features to refine the coarse depth predicted from
a cost volume, which makes it inherently vulnerable to the
error in the coarse stage and, thus, suffers from the error
propagation issue. In contrast, we avoid this by combining
cost volume and monocular features early, which performs
significantly better than TranSplat (Tab. 6). Another line of
work [12, 53] applies an additional depth loss to the Gaussian
optimization process. We note that these two approaches
(feed-forward vs. per-scene optimization) are orthogonal.
16454
Monocular FeaturesMonocular Features
ConcatenateConcatenate
Cost Vo l u m e sCost Vo l u m e s
Multi-View Transformer
Per-View ViT 3D Gaussians
Render
Unproject
Novel View
GT Novel ViewLossMulti-View Images
Monocular Branch
Multi-View BranchCost Vo l u m e s
Monocular Features
Concatenate2D U-Net
Figure 2. DepthSplat connects depth estimation and 3D Gaussian splatting with a shared architecture, which enables cross-task transfer. In
particular, DepthSplat consists of a multi-view branch to model feature-matching information and a single-view branch to extract monocular
features. The per-view cost volumes and monocular features are concatenated for depth regression with a 2D U-Net architecture. For the
depth estimation task, we train the depth model with ground truth depth supervision. For the Gaussian splatting task, we first unproject all
depth maps to 3D as the Gaussian centers, and in parallel, we use an additional head to predict the remaining Gaussian parameters. Novel
views are rendered with the splatting operation. The full model for novel view synthesis is trained with the photometric rendering loss,
which can also be used as an unsupervised pre-training stage for the depth model.
3. DepthSplat
Given N input images {I i}N
i=1, (I i ∈ RH×W ×3, where H
and W are the image sizes) with corresponding projection
matrices {Pi}N
i=1, (Pi ∈ R3×4, computed from the intrinsic
and extrinsic matrices), our goal is to predict dense perpixel depth Di ∈ RH×W and per-pixel Gaussian parameters
{(µj, αj, Σj, cj)}H×W ×N
j=1 for each image, where µj, αj,
Σj and cj are the 3D Gaussian’s position, opacity, covariance, and color. As shown in Fig. 2, key to our method is a
multi-view depth model augmented with monocular depth
features, where we obtain the position µj of each Gaussian
by unprojecting depth with camera parameters, and other
Gaussian parameters are predicted by an additional head.
More specifically, our depth model consists of two
branches: one for modeling feature matching using cost volumes, and another for extracting monocular features from a
pre-trained monocular depth network. The cost volumes and
monocular features are concatenated together for subsequent
depth regression with a 2D U-Net and a softmax layer. For
the depth task, we train our depth model with ground truth
depth supervision. Our full model for novel view synthesis
is trained with the rendering loss, which can also be used as
an unsupervised pre-training stage for the depth model. We
introduce the individual components below.
3.1. Multi-View Feature Matching
In this branch, we extract multi-view features with a multiview Transformer architecture and then build multiple cost
volumes that correspond to each input view.
Multi-View Feature Extraction. For N input images, we
first use a lightweight weight-sharing ResNet [27] architecture to get s× downsampled features for each image independently. To handle different image resolutions, we
make the downsampling factor s flexible by controlling
the number of stride-2 3 × 3 convolutions. For example,
the downsampling factor s is 4 if two stride-2 convolutions
are used and 8 if three are used. To exchange information
across different views, we use a multi-view Swin Transformer [34, 64, 65] which contains six stacked self- and
cross-attention layers to obtain multi-view-aware features
{Fi}N
i=1, F i ∈ R
H
s × W
s ×C, where C is the feature dimension. When more than two images ( N > 2) are given as
input, we perform cross-attention between each reference
view and its top-2 nearest neighboring views, which are selected based on their camera distances to the reference view.
This makes computation tractable with many input views.
Feature Matching. We encode the feature matching information across different views with the plane-sweep stereo
approach [13, 65]. More specifically, for each view i, we
first uniformly sample D depth candidates {dm}D
m=1 from
the near and far depth ranges and then warp the feature
F j of view j to view i with the camera projection matrix
and each depth candidate dm. Then we obtain D warped
features {F j→i
dm
}D
m=1 that correspond to feature F i. We
then measure their feature correlations with the dot-product
operation [9, 63]. The cost volume Ci ∈ R
H
s × W
s ×D for
image i is obtained by stacking all correlations. Ac